---
title: Version Control with Git and Github
description: Introduction to Git and GitHub. Linux Keyring Integration.
author: melihguclu
date: 2024-11-24 00:00:00 +0800
categories: [Linux, Commands]
tags: [git, programming, linux, github, keyring, en]
toc: true
lang: en
---

## Introduction


In this blog post, we will provide a brief introduction to **Git Version Control System**, which is widely used for file and source code tracking on Linux systems, and to **GitHub Cloud Hosting Service**, which is very popular due to its ease of use.


Our workflow today consists of several steps:

1. Installation and Configuration
2. Creating or Cloning a Repository
3. File Tracking
    - Files in the repository can be in either one of three states:
      - Modified: A file that has been changed but **not committed** yet.
      - Staged: A file that has been marked to be committed. 
      - Committed: A file that has been committed successfully.
4. **Pushing** the committed files to the remote server.
  
## Installation

First we install required packages using the package manager of the Linux distribution that we are using.

`sudo pacman -S git ksshaskpass kwallet`

## Configuration

To avoid entering the GitHub password every time, we can integrate Git with a **Keyring** application that supports **FreeDesktop**. In this post we will retrieve login details using **ksshaskpass** and store them in **KWallet**

`git config --global credential.helper /usr/lib/git-core/git-credential-libsecret`

This command allows us to select **FreeDesktop libsecret** library as the *credential helper** [^ref1]

Now for Git to locate and run **ksshaskpass**, we need to set the **GIT_ASKPASS** ([environment variable](/posts/environment_variables)) [^ref2]

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d/
echo "GIT_ASKPASS=/usr/bin/ksshaskpass" >> ~/.config/environment.d/git_askpass.conf
```

We can now login to our GitHub account and generate an **access token**.

> Make sure to store your tokens in a secure place and do not share them with anyone.
{: .prompt-warning }


## Usage

Let's clone any repository we have created previously.

``` bash
git clone https://github.com/melihguclu0/test-repo.git
cd test-repo
```
Git performs file tracking through hidden files it creates under the **.git/**


The cloned repository is likely to already contain this directory. However, in the other case, we can initialize a repository by running the `git init` command.


### Branch
We can protect the **main branch** from unwanted changes by splitting our project into different *branches*

Lets create a new branch named ***test-branch*** and switch to it.

```bash
git branch test-branch
git checkout test-branch
```

### Staging

>If we have made changes to the files on the remote server, we can *pull* them into the local repository using the `git pull` command.
{: .prompt-info }

Let's add a new file.
`echo "# This is a markdown heading" >> test.md"`

If we run the `git stat` command at this stage, we will encounter a warning indicating that the new files are not being tracked. This is because the modified files have not yet been added to the Staging area. We need to use the `git add` command.

```bash
git add test.md
```

### Commit
In the **commit** phase, to add a commit to the file, we need to provide at least one of either a name or email.

```bash
git config user.name "melihguclu0"
git config user.email "email"
```
These commands will only be valid for the local repository. However, by adding the `--global` argument to the commands, we can make them valid for all local repositories on the system.

With the following command, lets make our first commit.

`git commit -m "first commit!"`

### Merge

In above steps, we created the *test-branch* using `git branch` command and committed some changes. If we wish, we can merge it to the main branch again. But first we must switch to *main* branch and then merge with *test-branch*. 

```bash
git checkout main
git merge test-branch

```
### Push
Now we can upload our repo to GitHub servers with `git push` command.

If we want to keep using test-branch:
`git push --set-upstream origin test-branch`

**ksshashpass** will prompt for login details and save them to **KWallet**. After entering the GitHub username and then the access token, our changes will be uploaded to the server. While KWallet is open, it won't request password again. 
## References

[^ref1]: <https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Git#Using_git-credential-libsecret_as_credential-helper>

[^ref2]: <https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/KDE_Wallet#Using_the_KDE_Wallet_to_store_Git_credentials>

- <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2>


